The Project Gutenberg eBook, Prospects of the Church of England, by
Charles John Vaughan


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Prospects of the Church of England
       a sermon


Author: Charles John Vaughan



Release Date: November 14, 2020  [eBook #63763]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROSPECTS OF THE CHURCH OF
ENGLAND***


Transcribed from the 1868 Bell and Daldy edition by David Price.





                  _PROSPECTS OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND_.


                                 A SERMON

                             PREACHED IN THE

                       PARISH CHURCH OF DONCASTER,

                   ON SUNDAY EVENING, AUGUST 30, 1868,

                ON THE OCCASION OF THE FIRST OFFERTORY IN
                          LIEU OF A CHURCH-RATE.

                                * * * * *

                                    BY

                           C. J. VAUGHAN, D.D.

                           VICAR OF DONCASTER.

                                * * * * *

                         _Published by Request_.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                       BELL AND DALDY, YORK STREET,
                              COVENT GARDEN.
                                  1868.




PREFACE.


THIS Sermon was preached in the common course of the Sunday Services, and
without any idea of its being noticed beyond the circle of its hearers.
As, however, the interest of the subject, far more, certainly, than
anything in its treatment, has called some attention to the Sermon since
its delivery, I have thought it right to comply with the request of some
respected members of the Congregation, and commit it to the chances of
publication.  In so doing, I have made no attempt to supply its many
deficiencies, nor have I even removed from its opening sentences an
allusion to other Sermons of which it formed the continuation.

DONCASTER,
         _September_ 4, 1868.






A SERMON.


    Why repair ye not the breaches of the house?

                                                         2 _Kings_ xii. 7.

THE House is the Temple.  We have travelled, therefore, from the north to
the south of Palestine, from the capital of Israel to the capital of
Judah.  As soon as the two great prophets, Elijah and Elisha, are no
more, the interest of the story centres no longer in the kingdom of the
ten tribes: it reverts to the stock of David, and finds its latest gleam
of beauty and glory in the national reformations and personal pieties of
Hezekiah and Josiah.

Elisha is not yet dead: but he has ceased to occupy the sacred page after
the anointing of Jehu, until he appears once more, and finally, in the
striking incidents of his death-bed and his grave.

Meanwhile that Baal-worship which Jehu has extirpated in the north, has
found refuge in the southern realm, under the fostering patronage of a
daughter of the house of Ahab.  Jehoram, son of Jehoshaphat, had married
a second Jezebel, in the person of her daughter Athaliah.  Jehoram
reigned eight years, and was succeeded by his son Ahaziah, who perished,
as we read last Sunday, with his uncle Jehoram, son of Ahab, king of
Israel, under the hand of the avenging Jehu, the scourge of God.

Then Athaliah, seeing that her son was dead, determined to reign for
herself.  She was one of those masculine spirits, one of those heroines
of pride and crime, who can brook no puny, infant sovereigns; she could
not live to be ruled by a grandchild; and so she took the decisive step
of _destroying all the seed royal_, after which, it is said, _Athaliah_,
late the queen-mother, _did reign over the land_.

But it is seldom, on this earth—which is still God’s, however much, at
certain times, the devil may claim it for his own—it is seldom, I say,
that crime is quite prosperous, quite thorough: something is forgotten in
every murder, which rises at last into a testimony; and some one, some
little babe perhaps, is overlooked in every massacre; there is a sister,
it may be, or an aunt—as it was here—whose heart yearns over that little
cradle, and who contrives to rescue its unconscious occupant to be the
heir of the throne and the avenger of the family.

Such was King Joash; rescued by his aunt Jehosheba from her own mother’s
fury, and by her hidden, during six years of earliest childhood, in one
of the chambers of the Temple—for she was the wife of Jehoiada, the High
Priest.

In his seventh year, there was a conspiracy, a revolution, and a
coronation.  The little King was _shown_ to the people in the
temple-court, the crown was put upon him, the testimony (or book of the
law) was given him, he was made and he was anointed, and all the people
_clapped their hands_, _and said_, _God save the king_.  And when the
usurping grandmother, attracted by the tumult, came upon the scene, with
the cry, _Treason_, _treason_! the High Priest _had her forth without the
ranges_; she was allowed to pass unmolested through the crowd and through
the guard, till she was outside the consecrated ground; and there she was
slain.

This was the curious, memorable entrance of the little King Joash upon a
reign of forty years in Jerusalem.  You can imagine how that scene must
have printed itself on his memory.  It must have given a strange, a
solemn importance to the house of God, and all its belongings.  The
recollection of that sudden command, given by the High Priest, his uncle,
preserver, and king-maker, _Have her forth without the ranges_, must have
written upon his heart an indelible impression of the sacredness of that
spot which could thus arrest revolution and make the most righteous doom
impious.  You will not wonder, therefore, if his young thoughts were
first turned, as a Sovereign, to the wretched, the dilapidated state of
the Temple itself.  It appears that, on the one hand, there were long,
careless arrears of temple income: people had grown indifferent to the
payment of their most unquestionable dues to the Altar and the
Priesthood: on the other hand, there was a positive as well as a negative
defalcation; for on that sacred height of Mount Zion there had arisen,
side by side with God’s Temple, a rival shrine of Baal; and the
idolatress Athaliah, with her creatures, seems to have taken from the one
to build the other: in short, the very foundation and wall-stones of the
Holy House had been gradually pillaged and carted away, and the House
itself stood a monument at once of modern shame and ancestral glory,
needing the builder’s hand to restore it to decency and even to safety.

As for the vessels of the House—all those costly priceless treasures with
which the wealth and piety of king Solomon had filled it—they had gone,
bit by bit, to buy off the annoyances of powerful neighbours: King
Rehoboam, at the very outset of the schism, had given Shishak Solomon’s
shields of gold, and replaced them with pitiful shameful shields of
brass: it was too late, or too soon, to think of ornament—the present
question was one entirely of use and substantial repair.

It seems that even the efforts and injunctions of the young King were for
many years ineffectual.  In the twenty-third year of his reign the old
breaches were still unrepaired.  It is astonishing—men would not believe
till they had tried it—how long it takes to re-awaken one slumbering
conscience, or indeed to make one desired work of reparation, be it never
so small—we see it ourselves at this moment in a side-chapel of this
Church—a fact accomplished.  And so King Joash, stung to the soul by the
disappointment of his own good intentions, summons before him Jehoiada
the Priest, his own uncle and benefactor, and expostulates with him and
his brother-priests in the words of the text, _Why repair ye not the
breaches of the House_?

And the result of it is, that, instead of leaving the money received for
this purpose in the unaccountable hands of the Priests, they have a chest
made, with a hole bored in the lid of it, and set beside the altar; and
the Priests are to put all the money which they receive into this chest;
and then they have a civil auditor, the King’s scribe, a sort of
Secretary of State, to act with the High Priest in counting and applying
the sums thus accumulated, and so it passes direct into the hands of the
carpenters and builders, and the work is done.

My brethren, you will all perceive why I chose this text this evening,
when we are making our first collection, under altered circumstances, for
the more substantial part of our annual expenditure upon this Church.  It
is true, this House of Prayer is not in all respects like Solomon’s
Temple: I mean that, in Christian times, it is not the fabric, it is the
Congregation, which is the Temple or House of God.  Nevertheless, without
a fabric a congregation is a rope of sand: there must be a place if there
is to be a worship: and therefore the distinction, though true, may be
overstrained; and I am not afraid to apply to this Church, the building I
mean, the expostulation of King Joash with Jehoiada and the Priests, _Why
repair ye not the breaches of the House_?

I have not, indeed, one moment’s anxiety as to your response.  You love
_the place_, this place at least, _where God’s honour dwelleth_.  I
believe that your periodical offerings on this monthly occasion will be
almost, or perhaps quite, equal to those which you make for any work of
piety or charity: and I may remind you that there is an especial reason
why your offerings should be large at the outset, inasmuch as already
four months are gone by of the current year, and we have to supply in
eight months the resources (as they hereafter will be) of twelve.

But on this point I feel an entire security.  You will never allow those
who undertake the office of your Churchwardens to incur any
responsibility but such as you cheerfully guarantee to them.  I will
rather take the opportunity of saying one word upon the more general
question.

We have never in this place—certainly not for many years past—laid a
compulsory church-rate.  We have always allowed those who would to refuse
payment.  Even when the law was clearly with us, we have never taken
advantage of it.  So far, we might, if we would, have regarded the new
Act as confirming and stereotyping our own local custom.

But there were these two differences.  We could no longer carry with us
the influence, the persuasion, of an unenforced compulsion.  We could no
longer say, as heretofore, He _that may command_, _entreats_.  Henceforth
it was lawful to refuse.

Again, we could no longer extend our payments over the whole Town; and,
with whatever abatements from caprice or principle, hope to enlist, in
the work of reparation or maintenance, the sympathies of an entire
population.

It became necessary, therefore, that we should look to the Congregation
alone; and, in one form or in another, ask those to support, who really
love and use, this House of God.

Hence our appeal to you this evening.  And if on future occasions the
appeal is commonly made to you in silence, without special enforcement
from this place, yet let me hope that you will all register it in your
minds as a just claim, and not suffer these periodical gatherings to lose
their interest or to fail in their amount.

_Why repair ye not the breaches of the House_?  The subject expands
itself before us, and we read the remonstrance as applying no longer to
the fabric, but rather to these three larger and more sacred topics, the
Congregation, the Church, the soul.

1.  That anxiety which we do not feel about the fabric, for we are sure
that you will attend to it, we cannot stifle as regards the Congregation.

For indeed it is this which makes the House.  The building is only
valuable, only significant, for the sake of the inmates.  When it is
asked of us, _Why repair ye not the bleaches of the House_? we may look
up indeed at our broken pinnacles, our not watertight roof, our falling
flowers, our patchwork pomegranates, and think that these too require
attention or deserve reproach; but, after all, these are not the real
things; these altogether make not the House; the House, the Temple, now,
in these days of spirit and Gospel, is the community, the congregation,
the living body within.  How is it with this?  Are there no breaches
here, visible not to an eye of flesh, but to One who seeth in secret?

For example, my brethren, is there not too great a disproportion here
between the real and the nominal worshippers?  Is it not lamentable, is
it not even discreditable, that so many should be present at one Service
once on the Lord’s Day, and so few at any other Service either on this
Holy Day or on any other? that so many should come together here this
evening to listen to music or preaching, so few to pray and to praise, so
few to break the Holy Bread, or to drink the Sacred Wine?  Is not this
one of the _breaches of the House_, the spiritual house, which wants
_repairing_ amongst us?

2.  But this carries me on to a somewhat wider field, which I have called
not the Congregation, but the Church.  And here, as is natural indeed in
these eventful, these quickly moving times, my thoughts are upon our own
Church, that communion which is the congregation of congregations; that
communion which we have heretofore known as the Church of England by law
established.

So rapid has been the course of events in late years—I might single out
the last ten, or the last five, or (quite by exception) the last year of
all—that Church-people must prepare themselves, I feel sure, for a
speedy, a scarcely gradual, demolition of all that has been distinctive,
all that has been exceptionally advantageous, in their position.  An
eminent man and excellent Bishop, who was laid in his grave last Friday,
was wont to say, _If I live ten years_, _I shall be the last Bishop of
Peterborough_.  It is more than probable that some of my younger hearers
this evening may live not only to see what we call the Church of England
thrown altogether upon voluntary offerings for its maintenance—in which
case some of them may remember in old age the first collection made in
the Parish Church of Doncaster for the repairs of its fabric and the
expences of its services—but also to find it at least an open, perhaps a
very doubtful, question, to whom shall belong the Churches themselves and
the glebe-houses—whether indeed there shall be left to the old Church of
England, as we still fondly call it, any vestige of that legal standing
which has made her hitherto the calm shelter of her children, the
admiring wonder of foreigners, and the mark of obloquy or envy (as the
case might be) to thousands of her domestic enemies.

I am far from regarding this prospect—be it far off or near—with unmixed
alarm or dismay.  I never believed that the Establishment, as such, was
Christ’s Church in England, or that the withdrawal of the favour of the
State would be the putting out in our communion of the Divine Shechinah.
It is not so much for the Church that I fear: for I firmly believe
Christ’s words, _Lo_, _I am with you alway_, and doubt not that the old,
the everlasting benediction is able to repeat itself in many new, many
diverse forms.  I do fear something for the State, when it ceases to have
a religion.  I do fear something for the average tone of religion in our
cottages and in our palaces, when there is no longer one form of worship
which has upon it the stamp of pedigree and of custom; when it is an
evenly balanced question with every man and with every family, _Whither
shall I go this day for God’s worship_? _whither_, _or whether any
whither_?  I do fear that there will be more and more in many houses of a
cold indifferent scepticism, a Christless education and a Godless life.
I do fear that more and more may reach old age ignorant of a Saviour, and
go to their graves without any sure and certain hope of a resurrection to
eternal life.

For the Church itself I fear not.  In so far as the Church of England (so
called) has had Christ in her and God with her, she is indestructible and
immortal.  In so far as she has trusted in outward advantage, and
suffered herself, in her priests or in her people, to become sluggish,
lukewarm, contemptuous, or persecuting—in so far let a change into
adversity—God grant it—reform her.  The great question for all of us, in
our several stations, more especially in the days which are now coming,
or almost come, upon our Church, must be this one of the text, _Why
repair ye not the breaches of the House_?

Let the Priests of the Temple ask it—ask it of themselves—Are they
trusting at all in the advantages of an Establishment, and negligent, in
the same degree, of that personal industry, of that individual
self-sacrifice, which alone can justify their endowment, maintain their
honour, or do their work?  If the Established Church of England, as such,
be swept away, then, along with it, will go all idle, inconsistent,
scandalous Ministers: those who are to serve at God’s Altar afterwards
must be only such as are respected by their people: let it not have to be
said that England would gain as much as she loses by ceasing to have an
endowed, an established Ministry, inasmuch as, quite as often as not, the
Parish Minister was an indolent, an unworthy, or an inefficient man!
This is the way in which the Priests must set themselves to repair the
Temple-breaches.

Then for the People.  To what end does a Church exist amongst us?  To
what purpose this costly, this almost magnificent apparatus of vestment
and ritual, of Cathedral Church and elaborate minstrelsy?  Does it mean
anything, or nothing?  If it represents to the country, in symbol and
form, the wants of man’s soul, and the absolute necessity of a Divine
communion, then prove it by the using!  Do not talk of the duty of the
State, of the rights of the Church, of Apostolical Succession and an
authorized Ministry—and never use any!  When the Church of England
ceases, with our will or without it, to be an established, privileged, or
favoured Church at all; then, how many of you will be found to come
forward in its maintenance?  How many of you will worship here, when
there is no longer any traditional or conventional propriety in doing so?
How many will accept their position, in reference to man, as only one out
of fifty or a hundred denominations—treat with all respect and charity
others who follow not with them—and yet, for themselves, become but the
more earnest and devout Churchmen, in proportion as State aid and legal
endowment become things of the past—things, it may be, of remote and
almost forgotten history?

And, meanwhile, let me ask this of the Churchmen here assembled this
evening, Are we half as liberal—I ask it advisedly—in giving for the
maintenance of our Church, as are many bodies of Nonconformists in their
offerings for theirs?  You know that we are not.  Let us look about us in
this matter.  Let us rise to the emergency.  Show that you value your
Church, by giving bountifully in her behalf.  If the Church is what you
profess it to be, surely it is worth something, something even of
self-sacrifice, to maintain it in its efficiency.  You know that there
are many amongst us to whom the Church costs nothing.  On one pretext and
another, they evade all her burdens.  They grudge the very rents of their
sittings; and if those rents were exchanged to-morrow (as I would they
were) for Offertories, still they would give nothing.  My brethren, these
things ought not so to be.  By this grudging, this ungenerous spirit, we
are drawing down upon ourselves, as a judgment, the sentence of
disestablishment and disendowment.  Be it not so amongst us!  Count no
money better spent than that which is given for the repairing of the
breaches of this House; meaning now by the House, not only or chiefly the
fabric, but rather the purpose for which the fabric stands—the
edification and salvation of human souls.  Above all, see that you
rightly, earnestly, industriously use the means of grace herein afforded
you.  What would not they give, who are gone from us this last week by
disease or accident, unrepentant, unredeemed, for one such feast of love
as was accepted this morning by but six and twenty souls—for one such
opportunity as we have enjoyed this evening of drawing nigh to the Throne
of Grace through our one Divine Lord?

3.  Thus, then, we pass naturally, in conclusion, to that House, or
Temple of God, which is of all the most intimate, the most sacred, the
most inaccessible; yet in which, if anywhere, the true fire burns of an
acceptable sacrifice—the real altar is built of lively, living, devoted
stones.  That House is the soul; and it, too, has its _breaches_.  Yes,
we know it.  That Temple—which ought to _lie four-square_, which ought to
have everything in its place, which ought to be gleaming with the fire of
the Holy Ghost, and adorned with the precious stones of a meek and quiet
and pure and Godward spirit—that Temple, of which the light ought to be
shining through into the life, and making every act and word and thought
gracious and beneficent and God-recalling—that Temple is all jagged and
disordered and spotted and sin-stained—that Temple lets its altar-fire go
out every half-hour, and suffers _a darkness that may be felt_ to settle
down upon its chambers—making unbelievers at last say, _If that be
faith_, _give me reason_; _if that be piety_, _give me conscience_; _if
that indeed be religion_, _let me know only the heathen’s revelation_—_of
good sense_, _good nature_, _and an elevated self-love_!

_Why repair ye not the breaches of the House_?

Do we answer, _I cannot_?  It is a reproach, it is a calumny, upon the
Gospel of Divine grace.  That is the very revelation of the Gospel—_God
giveth more grace_: more, as we need more; more, as we ask more; more, as
we look and wait and make room for more.  I _cannot_?  No; but God can.
_Ask_, _and ye shall have_.

Or do we answer, _I need not_?  _I am well enough as I am_—_God is very
merciful_—_He knows our frame_, _and whatever deficiencies He sees in
me_, _Christ will make them up_?  Alas! it is too often the evangelical
reply—if not with the lips, then in the heart!  Christ died to make sin
less sinful, to make sin less dangerous, by substituting a figment of
justification for a reality of holiness, watchfulness, and self-control!
Thus even the Blessed Lord Himself is made _a minister of sin_, and man
turns the very table of his blessing into a new occasion of falling!

Or do we answer, finally, _I will not_?  _I love the breaches of my
soul’s house_; _I do not wish that the gusts of passion should be fenced
out_; _I do not wish that there should be no crack or cranny through
which I may peep out on the world’s vanities_, _nor any secret neglected
postern through which some delicious delirious lust may creep in to
intoxicate me_?  Oh! worst of all, most hopeless, this last answer—the
answer of many consciences, will they but speak, in this great
Congregation; the answer which not only virtually denies, but wilfully
refuses, the Gospel; which makes the Cross an offence, and Christ to have
died in vain!

May it please God, by some one of His thousand, His myriad agencies, to
make us feel! to bring us to our knees in hearty repentance before Him;
and then, even as it is written, _humbling ourselves_ first _under His
mighty hand_, at last to _exalt us in due time_!




_RECENT WORKS BY DR. C. J. VAUGHAN_.


THE CHURCH OF THE FIRST DAYS.  Lectures on the Acts of the Apostles.  I.
THE CHURCH OF JERUSALEM, SECOND EDITION.  II.  THE CHURCH OF THE
GENTILES.  SECOND EDITION.  III.  THE CHURCH OF THE WORLD.  SECOND
EDITION.  Fcap. 8vo, cloth, price 4_s._ 6_d._ each.

LECTURES ON THE REVELATION OF ST. JOHN.  SECOND EDITION.  Two Vols. crown
8vo, price 15_s._

WORDS FROM THE GOSPELS.  Sermons preached in the Parish Church of
Doncaster.  NEW EDITION.  Fcap. 8vo, price 4_s._ 6_d._

NOTES FOR LECTURES ON CONFIRMATION.  With suitable Prayers.  SIXTH
EDITION.  1_s._ 6_d._

LECTURES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS.  SECOND EDITION.  Price 7_s._
6_d._

EPIPHANY, LENT, AND EASTER.  A Selection of Expository Sermons. THIRD
EDITION, REVISED.  Crown 8vo, 10_s._ 6_d._

TWELVE DISCOURSES on Subjects connected with the Liturgy and Worship of
the Church of England.  Price 6_s._

THE BOOK AND THE LIFE: and other Sermons preached before the University
of Cambridge.  NEW EDITION.  Fcap. 8vo, 4_s._ 6_d._

MEMORIALS OF HARROW SUNDAYS.  A Selection of Sermons preached in Harrow
School Chapel.  With a View of the Chapel.  FOURTH EDITION.  Crown 8vo,
10_s._ 6_d._

ST. PAUL’S EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.  The Greek Text, with English Notes.
THIRD EDITION.  (In the Press.)  Crown 8vo, 5_s._

LESSONS OF LIFE AND GODLINESS.  A Selection of Sermons preached in the
Parish Church of Doncaster.  THIRD EDITION.  Fcap. 8vo, 4_s._ 6_d._

THE EPISTLES OF ST. PAUL FOR ENGLISH READERS.  Part I. containing _The
First Epistle to the Thessalonians_.  8vo, 1_s._ 6_d._

LIFE’S WORK AND GOD’S DISCIPLINE.  Three Sermons preached before the
University of Cambridge in April and May, 1865.  SECOND EDITION.  Fcap.
8vo, 2_s._ 6_d._

THE WHOLESOME WORDS OF JESUS CHRIST.  Four Sermons preached before the
University of Cambridge in November, 1866.  Fcap. 8vo, 3_s._ 6_d._



SINGLE SERMONS, &c.


THE JOY OF SUCCESS CORRECTED BY THE JOY OF SAFETY.  An Ordination Sermon.
1860.

THE MOURNING OF THE LAND AND THE MOURNING OF ITS FAMILIES.  On the Death
of the Prince Consort.  1861.  THIRD EDITION.

THE THREE TABERNACLES.  On the Opening of St. Peter’s School Chapel,
York.  1862.

QUIETNESS AND CONFIDENCE THE STRENGTH OF THE CHURCH.  On the Consecration
of Trinity Church, Handsworth.  1864.  1_s._

SON, THOU ART EVER WITH ME.  In the Chapel of the Magdalen Hospital.
1864.  1_s._

FREE AND OPEN WORSHIP IN THE PARISH CHURCHES OF ENGLAND.  SECOND EDITION.
Fcap. 8vo.  6_d._

MUSIC IN CHURCHES.  At a Festival of a Church Choral Association.  Fcap.
8vo.  6_d._

THE HAND AND THE SCROLL.  On the Sudden Death of the Mayor of Doncaster.
1867.  6_d._

THE REVISED CODE OF THE COMMITTEE OF COUNCIL ON EDUCATION DISPASSIONATELY
CONSIDERED.  1862.  THIRD EDITION.

RUBRICAL MODIFICATION NOT LITURGICAL CHANGE.  A Few Words on the Burial
Service.  1864.  6_d._

                                * * * * *

RAYS OF SUNLIGHT FOR DARK DAYS.  A Book of Select Readings for the
Suffering.  With a Preface by C. J. VAUGHAN, D.D.  NEW EDITION.  18mo.
cloth extra, 3_s._ 6_d._  Morocco, Old Style, 9_s._

                 MACMILLAN AND CO., London and Cambridge.

                                * * * * *

PLAIN WORDS ON CHRISTIAN LIVING.  Small 8vo.  4_s._ 6_d._

CHRIST THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.  Small 8vo.  4_s._ 6_d._

CHARACTERISTICS OF CHRIST’S TEACHING.  Small 8vo.  4_s._ 6_d._

VOICES OF THE PROPHETS ON FAITH, PRAYER, AND HUMAN LIFE.  Small 8vo.
4_s._ 8_d._

               ALEXANDER STRAHAN, 56, Ludgate Hill, London.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

           CHISWICK PRESS:—PRINTED BY WHITTINGHAM AND WILKINS,
                       TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PROSPECTS OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND***


******* This file should be named 63763-0.txt or 63763-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/3/7/6/63763


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

